            HOMEWORK 2  (18.315, FALL 2005)


1)  Let X   R2 be the set of n   4 points in general positions. Supposed points in X are
colored with two colors, such that for every four points there is a line separating points of
diﬀerent color. Prove that there exist a line separating the colors of all points in X.
   Hint:  use Helly’s theorem (see e.g. Matousek’s book)

2) A claw is a bipartite graph K1,3. A claw covering of graph G is a partition of all edges of G
into triples of edges which are adjacent at one vertex, i.e. form a claw. A plane triangulation
is a graph all whose faces (including the outside face) are triangles. Prove that every plane
triangulation   contains a face    , so that  −   has a claw covering.





    Figure 1. Claw covering of the graph of icosahedron (here    is the outside face).



3)  Consider all claw coverings of G =  −    , where     is a planar triangulation and     is
the outside face. Orient all edges in the claws away from the roots as in Figure 1. Note that
changing the orientation along an oriented cycle transforms one claw covering into another (see
Figure 2). We call this a ﬂip.
   a) Prove that every two claw coverings of G are connected by a sequence of ﬂips;
   b) same, but now only ﬂips along cycles of length 3 are allowed.





                  Figure 2. Transformations of claw coverings.



4) Let Qn be an equilateral n-triangle on a triangular lattice. Consider colorings   of all lattice
points in Qn with colors {1, 2, 3}. Deﬁne f ( ) to be the number of triangles in  with clockwise
coloring 1-2-3 minus the same with clockwise coloring 3-2-1. Prove that f ( ) is the same for all

                                                   1

2                     HOMEWORK 2  (18.315, FALL 2005)

colorings   with ﬁxed coloring of the boundary @Qn. In other words, show that f( ) depends
only on the coloring of the boundary (see Figure 3 below).





      Figure 3. An example of two colorings of Q6 with three colors red, yellow,
       and blue, and the same coloring of the boundary. We have f := (# r-y-b) −
      (# b-y-r) = 1 in both cases.



5) Prove that a 3-dimensional cube cannot be tiled by a ﬁnite number cubes of distinct size.

6) Prove that every tiling of a d-dimensional cube by smaller cubes contains at least 2d cubes.


? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

Please remember to write the name(s) of your collaborators (see collaboration policy).