  
 
 
18.212: Algebraic Combinatorics 
Andrew Lin 
Spring 2019 
This class is being taught by Professor Postnikov. 
April 24, 2019 
Recall from last class that we thought about the weighted matrix tree theorem: we have variables xij for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, 
where xii = 0 (since we have no loops). Then we deﬁned the Laplacian matrix
8P
< 
(Lout)ij 
k6=i xik 
i = j 
= :−xij 
i =6 
j. 
We could then formulate a general statement: 
Theorem 1 
The cofactor (Lout)rr is the sum over all spanning in-trees 
X 
weight(T ), 
T in-tree 
rooted at r 
where the weight of a tree is the product of its edges. 
We will always have nn−2 terms on the right hand side, because we can take any undirected tree on n vertices and then 
direct everything towards the root! Then take the product of all xij , where there is an edge in our tree from i to j. 
Let’s show an interesting method for the proof. 
Proof. Without loss of generality, let r = n. By deﬁnition, the cofactor (Lout)nn is just a sum over permutations 
n−1 
X
Y 
(Lout)iwi 
(−1) `(w) 
. 
w ∈Sn−1 
i=1 
where `(w ) is the sign of the permutation w . Permutations break into cycles, so we can instead write this as a product 
over the individual cycles: 
0
1 0
1 
X 
B
Y
C 
Y
X 
± B 
xij A
C · @ 
xf j A . 
@ 
subdivision of [n] 
i→j edge of 
f ﬁxed point j6=f 
into disjoint cycles 
some Cj 
C1∪C2 ···Cm ∪{ﬁxed points} 
Basically, this just writes our terms out in terms of the xij s by the deﬁnition of the Laplacian matrix! 
Question 2. What do we know about the ±? 
1 


Claim 2.1. For a permutation σ with a single cycle of size c, 
(−1) `(σ) = (−1)c−1 . 
For example, we get a −1 from a transposition, 1 from a 3-cycle, and so on. But we also get an additional contribution 
of (−1)c , because our Laplacian matrix has entries equal to −xij ! This means that every cycle contributes a −1, and 
therefore we get a (−1)m at the front if we have m cycles. 
How do we write this down combinatorially? Every cycle looks like some union of ﬁxed points and cycles on the numbers 
P 
1 through n − 1: let’s say the cycles are colored in red. To represent the 
xf j term, we pick an arbitrary green edge out 
from a ﬁxed point into other vertices, potentially including n. So then we are summing over directed graphs H on the 
vertices {1, 2, · · · , n} with n − 1 edges colored in red or green with the following conditions: 
• For all vertices i = 1, · · · , n − 1, the outdegree is 1. 
• The red edges form a disjoint union of cycles. 
This means we can rewrite the sum as 
X
Y 
(−1)number of red cycles 
xij 
graphs H
i→j edge 
This looks a lot like what we want in the theorem. In-trees rooted at n exactly correspond to digraphs without cycles with 
n − 1 edges, such that the outdegree of every non-root vertex is 1! Now the in-trees have zero red cycles, and basically 
our goal is for the sum of all the other terms! So our goal is to show a weight-preserving, sign-reversing involution ω on 
graphs H with at least one cycle. 
That’s not hard to create: ﬁrst of all, ﬁx a total ordering of edges i → j. (We can just do this lexicographically.) Thus, 
we can also order all possible cycles lexicographically. Now ﬁnd the ﬁrst cycle in H and switch its color between green and 
red! 
So our resulting graph has the same edges but a di˙erent parity of the number of red cycles, so those terms always 
cancel out. Thus our sum only leaves the contributions from in-trees, and we’re done! 
Remember that we did this with the Euler’s pentagonal number theorem as well, and we’ll see it later on as well. This is 
called the involution principle. 
Our next topic is about electrical networks, and this is related to the matrix tree theorem! Let’s start by something we 
may have learned in physics class. 
Given a graph G, think of edges as resistors - that’s the only circuit element that we’ll use today. Select two vertices A 
and B to be connected to some source of electricity. 
Some current will then be generated through the edges: our goal is to ﬁnd the voltages, currents, and so on. 
To talk about this rigorously, we’ll ﬁx the orientation of edges. (The current is just negated if we ﬂip the orientation, so 
the actual direction isn’t particularly important.) Then for any edge e from vertices u to v, we have three numbers: 
• A current Ie through the edge 
• A potential di˙erence or voltage Ve across the edge 
• A resistance Re which is a positive real number. 
If we were physicists, we would mention units, but because this is mathematics, we don’t need them. 
Theorem 3 (First Kirchho˙’s law) 
2 


The sum of the in-currents of any vertex is the same as the sum of the out-currents. In other words, for any vertex v, 
X
X 
Ie = 
Ie0 . 
e:u→v
e0v→w 
The ﬁrst Kirchho˙’s law can be thought of as a “conservation of charge” statement. 
Theorem 4 (Second Kirchho˙’s law) 
For any cycle C in our graph with edges e1, · · · , em, the sum of the voltages is 0 if we direct all the signs. Speciﬁcally, 
m
X 
±Vei = 0 
i=1 
where we ﬁx the orientation of our cycle, and we have a − exactly when an edge disagrees with the orientation of the 
cycle. 
Fact 5 
The second law is equivalent to the existence of a potential function 
U : {vertices} → R 
such that for any edge e : u → v, Ve = U(v ) − U(u). 
Speciﬁcally, this means we can “ground” one vertex at voltage 0, and then we can iteratively ﬁgure out the voltages of 
the whole graph by following edges arbitrarily. The second law then tells us that there aren’t any contradictions, since two 
paths will always have the same voltage! 
Theorem 6 (Ohm’s law) 
For any edge e, 
Ve = Ie Re . 
This is really a statement that deﬁnes resistance, so it doesn’t really warrant a proof: it explains the setup of why we 
have resistances, currents, and voltages. 
A typical problem is of the form “given all resistances, ﬁnd all the currents and voltages.” Basically, we can write a 
bunch of linear equations, and we can use those to calculate the answer. It turns out we can represent this as a Kirchho˙ 
matrix: it’s actually the same thing as the Laplacian matrix! Our weights will basically look like the conductances, which 
are inversely proportional to the resistances. 
3 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIT OpenCourseWare 
https://ocw.mit.edu 
18.212 Algebraic Combinatorics 
Spring 2019 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms. 
