18.433 Combinatorial Optimization
Flow Duality and algorithms

Sept 25, 30 Lecturer: Santosh Vempala
1 Introduction
A directed graph is a graph in which every edge has a direction. A capacity is the maximum
flow allowed on an edge, and is represented by ¢j,j, where the edge connects the vertices i
and j in the direction from i to j.
Given a directed graph G = (V, £), a flow is a collection of paths from a source s € V toa
sink t € V. The set of edge disjoint paths is the collection of all paths from s to t such that
no edge appears in more than one path.
Suppose S is a set of vertices containing s but not containing ¢. Then § = V - $ is the
compliment of set $. The size of a cut ($,8) is the number of edges from $ to 5.
Theorem 1. (Menger) A graph G=(V,E) has k edge disjoint paths from s to t <=> k is
the size of the minimum directed s —t cut.
Proof.
(=) This direction is trivial.
(<=) Assume this is false. Take the smallest counter example G. So G has minimum cut size
k but does not contain k edge disjoint paths from s to t. Since G is minimal the removal
of any edge will induce a graph with a smaller minimum cut. In particular, G contains no
edges into the source s or out of the sink t as these arcs are not present in any s — ¢ cut.
We can divide our problem into two cases:
(i) de € E that is not incident to s or t. Now, by the minimality of G, ¢ is contained in
some minimum cut ($,3). The contraction of the set 5 gives a graph G’ with a minimum
cut of at least &. Similarly the contraction of the set $ gives a graph G" with a minimum
cut of at least k. Since G was the smallest counterexample, G’ has k disjoint paths from s
to the contracted vertex 5 whilst G” has k disjoint paths from the contracted vertex S to t.
‘These two sets of k edge disjoint paths only coincide on edges within the cut ($, 5). Hence
they may be merged to form k edge disjoint paths from s to t in G. A contradiction.

1


(ii) Every edge is incident to s or t. Arrange the middle vertices (all vertices except s and
t) into the following two groups:

1. All vertices who have more edges going in than out, and s.

2. All vertices who have more edges going out than in, and t.
Observe that, by definition, the set of edges that go from the first group to the second group
must contain k edges. It then follows easily that we may find a collection of k edge disjoint
paths from s to t.. 0
2 The Maximum Flow-Minimum Cut Theorem
‘The capacity of a cut ($,5), denoted c($, 3), is equal to the sum of the capacities of each
edge in the cut whose direction is from §. Let f be a flow from s to t. We will abuse our
notation and also denote by f the value of the flow.
Lemma 2. Let (5,5) be any s—t cut in the graph G. Then f < (8,5).
Proof. We know that f(s,V) — f(V,s) =f. We also know that f(e,V) — f(V,2) =0 for
all € V —{s,t}. Using this, we can see that f($,V) - f(V, 8) = f. We also know that V
is equal to the union of $ and 5. Thus we have f($,5) — f(§,8) = f. In conclusion

f= F(S,8) — (8,8) < 1(8,8) < (8,5) 0

Ina finite graph there is always a maximum possible flow. Finding this maximum value and
the flow that attains it can be a very important part of many graph and network problems.
Suppose we have a graph G = (V,E), where s,¢ € V are the source and sink, respectively.
Take a flow f from s to t. Is it the maximum flow? If we look again at Lemma 2, we can
see that the value of the maximum flow is at most the value of the minimum capacity cut.
So one way to see if f is maximum is to look for the minimum cut, find it’s capacity, and
compare the values. A better way is to attempt to find an augmenting path for f. Given
our graph, with source s and sink t, an augmenting path for f is a path {up,ui,..., ur}
where:

Lu =s.

2. If (uj, uiy1) is an edge then fiiy1 < ciip1-

2


3. If (ujsi, uj) is an edge then fi.1 4 > 0.
We can see that for each vertex in the path, with the exception of s and t, the net flow must
equal 0. If u, = t, then our augmenting path is a flow augmenting path or f-augmenting
path, and can be used to increase flow value.
‘This leads us to an algorithm for finding max flow that is very similar to the one we used
to find maximum matching in a graph.
ALGorirEM I
{
1) Pind an f-augmenting path.
2) Augment the original flow.
3) Repeat.
}
This algorithm leaves us with a few questions. What is the best way to find an augmenting
path? Is this process bounded? Is f maximum when an augmenting path does not exist?
We will answer these questions is reverse order.
Theorem 3. A flow f is mazimum <=> there are no flow augmenting paths.
Proof.
(+) Clearly if there is a flow augmenting path then f can not be a maximum flow.
(<) Take the set of vertices Ay = {u € V : 3 an augmenting path from s to u.}. Note that
t ¢ Ay as we have no flow augmenting path. Consider the cut (Ay, Ay). Take an edge (i,j),
where i € Ay and j € Ay. Note that for this edge fi; = ¢i,j otherwise we could grow Ay.
Similarly f;; = 0. This gives us the the flow across the cut is) ¢;,j — 0. We can’t send
anymore than the capacity of the cut, so therefore the flow is maximum if t ¢ Ay. O
Theorem 4. (Mar Flow-Min Cut) The marimum flow is equal to the minimum capacity
cut.
Proof. Suppose f is the maximum flow value. Therefore the flow f has no augmenting
paths. Since it has no augmenting paths, the graph contains a cut, given by Ay, of capacity
J. Since no cut can have a capacity less than f the result follows. 0.

3


# \.
. H /
s
4
Figure 1: The initial flow.
3 Algorithmic Efficiency
‘The second question to be answered is whether or not the algorithm for finding an aug-
menting path is bounded. The answer is, not necessarily. If we look at the Figure 1, finding
the wrong set of augmenting paths will lead to an infinite number of augmentation whose
auginentation leads to a flow with value less than the maximum flow. The edges have
extremely large capacities and the initial flow, of value 1 + @ + a where @ is the root of
1—a-—a* =0, is shown in Figure 1.
To find an augmenting path in this graph, pick a path that starts at s and proceeds to t.
Find the lowest current flow value on this path, counting only the edges whose direction
goes against the direction of your path. We do not worry about the edges going in the
direction of our path, since the capacities of all edges are extremely large. Augment by this
value.
For an example, see Figure 2. We may augment this flow by a value a. In the subsequent
step the situation is similar except that we may find an augmenting path with capacity
a”. In the next step we may augment along a path of capacity a3. Observe that we have
an infinite process. In addition, the limit of the value of the flow obtained is bounded
(L+a+a?+¥,,, 0") whereas the maximum flow can be any value.
4


Figure 2: Augmentation by alpha.
_
Figure 3: Residual Graph
4 A Weakly Polynomial Algorithm
‘There are better ways to find an augmenting path than by picking a random flow and
trying to augment it. We can try making a residual graph. A residual graph takes each
edge and makes it two different edges, Take the edge (i,j), with capacity ¢;; and flow
fig. The residual graph Res(@) would have two edges between i and j, each with opposite
directions. Edge (i,j) has a capacity on it equal to ¢;,j — fij, while the capacity on edge
(j,i) is fij. I either of the capacities is zero the we will omit the edge from Res(G). If
there are already two edges of opposite direction connecting the two vertices, then forming
the residual graph becomes a little more complicated (see figure 3).
Claim 1. An augmenting path in G corresponds to a directed s - ¢ path in Res(G), and
therefore and augmenting path in G corresponds to a directed path from s to ¢ in Res(@).
a
This leads us to a new algorithm, similar to the one we were using before.
AvcoriTHM II
5


{

1) Find an s ~ ¢ path in Res(G)

2) Augment the flow.

3) Repeat.

}

‘The problem with this, as with before, is that it depends on picking a good original path to

augment. How do we make a good choice of path? A good place to start would be to pick

the path with the maximum capacity. This is a bounded search, a proof of this is asked for

in the homework.

Claim 2. A flow f can be decomposed into at most m paths from s to t, excluding cycles.

Proof of Claim. Every time you create a path, remove the restraining edge in that path

from the graph. The restraining edge is that whose flow capacity is filled, and thereby holds

you back from sending any more flow down this path. We can easily induce that there can

be no more than m paths. 0

Theorem 5. There is a path P with (P) > “=, where f is the current flow value and

f° is the optimal flow value.

Proof. Take a graph G, and let f* be the max flow, and f be the current flow. In Res(@)

you should be able to send f* — f as your max flow. Therefore there exists a path P in

Res(@) where e(P) > Z=£, 0.

Now let us examine the running time of the algorithm. We can find a maximum capacity

path in O(m) time. Consider the set of augmentations, each with a capacity of at least

F=! There are at most 2m such augmentations. After these augmentations, the remaining

flow is at most 42, since after the augmentations the current maximum capacity path has

capacity below =£, We can see that the flow remaining halves at most every 2m steps,

and from this get that the total number of augmentations is at most 2m log(nU). We then

have a weakly polynomial running time of O(m? log(nU)).

5 A Strongly Polynomial Algorithm

Another way to pick which path to start with when looking for an augmenting path is to

look for the shortest augmenting path. Start at the source, and look at everything you can

get to in one step. That is to say, every vertex that is only one edge away. We will call
6


these depth 1. Now find depths 2,3,... in similar fashion. Find the lowest depth to touch
the sink, and send on it as much as you can send. Now take d(i) to be the level of depth
of node i. Note that on an edge (i,j) in shortest path from s to t we have d(j) = d(i) + L.
The following observation is left as an exercise.
Observation. The shortest path lengths are non-decreasing in the course of this algorithm.
Lemma 6. The total number of times an edge can be the minimum capacity edge is O(n).
Proof. Suppose the edge (i,j) with capacity 8 is the minimum capacity edge along the
augmenting path. Augment by 3. Now Res(G) no longer contains the edge (i,j). Before
the augmentation, at time r say, we had d(j) = d(i) +1 since we used a shortest path.
Now, the next time this edge is used the edge (i, j) must again be in Res(@). For this to be
the case we must, in the meantime have augmented along some path containing the edge
(j,i). At this point, say at time 7’, we have d'(i) = d'(j) +1. Hence a'(i) > d(i) +2. The
maximum value of d(i) is n and the theorem follows. Observe also that the total increase
of d(i)’s over all vertices is less than n”, and therefore the total number of augmentations
is O(n). O
Since it takes O(m) time to find a shortest path the running time of this algorithm is
O(mn?), a strongly polynomial bound.

7
