292
IX. CURVED GEOMETRIES
40. Geometry of combinatorial surfaces
A priori, combinatorial surfaces seem hardly the kind of object that can have curvature, but one
can in fact make sense of that. The triangles makinf up the surface are thought of as flat, and
the curvature is concentrated at the vertices (like a Dirac δ-function), where it appears in the
form of an angle defect. In this lecture,
• we introduce combinatorial surfaces with added geometric data;
• we explain a version of Gauss-Bonnet for such surfaces;
• finally, we return to our discussion of polygonal billiards, and explain how this gives rise
to a particular construction of surfaces.
(40a) Geometric combinatorial surfaces. Recall that a combinatorial surface S is a special
case of an abstract complex. As such, it is constructed from vertices, edges and triangles, accord-
ing to given incidence rules. A geometry on a combinatorial surface is specified like this: each
edge (i, j) should be given a positive length lij > 0; such that for each triangle (p, q, r), we have
the triangle inequalities
(40.1)
lpr < lpq + lqr,
lpq < lpr + lqr,
lqr < lpq + lpr.
Visually, one thinks of each triangle as drawn in the Euclidean plane (up to Euclidean transfor-
mations, which means that only its congruence class matters), in a way which is compatible with
the prescribed edge-lengths. This realizability is equivalent to (40.1), and the lengths determine
the congruence class.
Look at a vertex of our surface. By definition, it is surrounded by a collection of triangles, which
can be drawn in the plane as in (31.1). However, this picture isn’t necessarily compatible with
realizing the triangles geometrically; in the relevant congruence classes, the angles surrounding
the vertex may not add up to 2π. We give this defect a name: the discrete curvature at our
vertex is
(40.2)
κvertex = 2π −
X
(adjacent angles of the triangles at the vertex).
For bookkeeping purposes, since the vertices are numbered as 1, . . . , n0, we have discrete curva-
tures κ1, . . . , κn0.
Proposition 40.1. The sum Pn0
i=1 κi of the discrete curvatures at all vertices of the surface S
equals 2πχ(S), where χ is the Euler characteristic.
This is completely elementary: P
i κi is 2πn0 (the number of vertices) minus the sum of all
angles that occur on our surface, which is πn2 (the number of triangles). Because of the surface
condition, the number of edges is n1 = 3
2n2. Therefore,
(40.3)
2πχ(S) = 2π(n0 −n1 + n2) = 2π(n0 −n2/2) = 2πn0 −πn2 =
X
i
κi.
40. GEOMETRY OF COMBINATORIAL SURFACES
293
Example 40.2. Let’s think of an icosahedron, in its original incarnation as a Platonic solid (all
edges have the same length). Since there are five equilateral triangles adjacent to each vertex,
κi = 2π −5(π/3) = π/3. There are twelve vertices, so P
i κi = 4π. Indeed, we know that the
Euler characteristic is 2.
Example 40.3. For a torus, realized in any way as a combinatorial surface, the Euler charac-
teristic is zero. Hence, the discrete curvatures must sum to zero (either they are all zero, or else
curvatures of either sign must occur).
Example 40.3 should remind you of the statement about the integral of the Gaussian curvature for
a doubly periodic geometry, Example 39.4. Indeed, there is a Gauss-Bonnet theorem for curved
surfaces, which we can’t state, not having the definition of such a surface; and then, Proposition
40.1 can be viewed as the discrete combinatorial analogue of that theorem.
(40b) Geodesics on combinatorial surfaces. A geodesic on the ordinary plane is just a
straight line. Similarly, in a combinatorial surface that’s been equipped with a geometry, we can
move inside each triangle in a straight-line constant-speed motion; and whenever we cross an
edge, we continue onto the adjacent triangle with the same speed and at the same angle from
their common edge. The outcome is called a combinatorial geodesic. If we happen to run into a
vertex, the behaviour becomes undefined, and the geodesic will end there.
Example 40.4. The following picture shows a tetrahedron as one would make it out of paper,
folding the outer triangles up and gluing their sides together; and a periodic geodesic on it:
(40.4)
glue
glue
glue
(40c) Translation surfaces. The description of combinatorial geodesics may have reminded you
of something, namely our original discussion of polygonal billiards. There is indeed a connection
between the two, for polygons with rational angles. Let’s more specifically take a triangle whose
angles are integer multiples of 180◦/N for some N.
We can associate to such a triangle a
combinatorial surface, called its translation surface. To do that, simply take the triangle, and
start repeatedly reflecting it along its sides. The reflected triangles will usually start to overlap,
but whenever that happens, we avoid it by translating one of the triangles to somewhere else
in the plane.
Also, we don’t want to keep copies which are just translations of each other,
so after finitely many reflections, we will have a complete collection. Moreover, whenever we
separate a triangle and its reflected copy by translating them apart, let’s remember their original
common edge (the edge of the reflection). Those edges are glued back together (in an abstract
294
IX. CURVED GEOMETRIES
sense, meaning they are the same edge in the abstract complex) to form the translation surface
associated to our triangle.
Example 40.5. Take a triangle with angles (π/4, π/4, π/2). The associated translation surface
is a torus, which consists of the following pattern of triangles with the sides identified.
(40.5)
glue
Since this triangle has symmetries, we have drawn a symbol inside the triangles so that you can
see how they are reflected copies of each other. This is the infinite periodic tiling (6.9) “rolled
up” into a torus. Note that this translation surface has 4 vertices: both the center and the corner
of the square in (40.5) come from the right angle in the original triangle.
Example 40.6. Take a triangle with angles (π/8, 3π/8, π/2). Composing two reflections on axes
that intersect at a π/8 angle gives a π/4 rotation, which we can also do repeatedly; from the other
angles we don’t get any additional rotations. So, we have 8 rotations that we will apply to our
triangle, plus reflected versions, making 16 triangles. If we first do the reflections around the π/8
vertex, we can draw the 16 without overlap:
(40.6)
a
h
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
c
b
e
d
g
f
h
translated copy
However, other reflections will cause opposite sides of this octagon to become identified with each
other (the arrow in our picture indicates how that happens). This identification is not the same
as when constructing the projective plane: opposite sides are identified by a translation, not by a
180◦rotation!
Attentive readers will have noticed a problem, clearly visible in (40.5). Namely, a translation
surface may violate one of our original conditions in the definition of abstract complex: there
can be two different edges that connect the same endpoints. This is just a bookkeeping problem:
originally, we had labeled the edges by their pairs of endpoints; now, we’ll just have to index
them in some other way, and then remember what the endpoints of each edge are.
It’s like
changing the data structures in our computer code; the actual mathematics remains the same,
40. GEOMETRY OF COMBINATORIAL SURFACES
295
including notions of Euler characteristics, Betti numbers, and orientability. Speaking of the latter,
translation surfaces are always orientable (this comes from their construction by reflections).
As one can see from the construction, translation surfaces are naturally geometric. Each vertex
of a translation surface comes from one of the original vertices of the triangle. Basically, we keep
reflecting along lines passing through that vertex until we get back in original position. This
means:
Fact 40.7. If a vertex of the translation surface comes from a vertex of the triangle with an angle
π a
b (with a and b coprime), the discrete curvature at our vertex will be 2π(1 −a).
Example 40.8. For the (π/8, 3π/8, π/2) triangle, two kinds of vertices (those for the smallest
and largest angle) will have discrete curvature zero, but the remaining kind has curvature −4π.
There is only one such vertex (it corresponds to the vertices of the octagon in (40.6); the identifi-
cation of opposite sides causes any two of those to become the same). The discrete Gauss-Bonnet
theorem says that the Euler characteristic must be −2. This is not one of the surfaces we’ve seen
before, it’s an “orientable genus two surface”. Such surfaces are usually shown in space like this:
(40.7)
Our original analysis of billiards trajectories, by drawing them as straight lines continuing into
reflected triangles, now turns into the following:
Fact 40.9. The billiards motion in the triangle can be viewed as the motion along geodesics on
the associated translation surface.
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu 
18.900 Geometry and Topology in the Plane 
Spring 2023 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms. 
