Privacy and Terms of Use | MIT OpenCourseWare | Free Online Course Materials
menu
search
Give Now
About OCW
Help & Faqs
Contact Us
search
GIVE NOW
about ocw
help & faqs
contact us
Privacy and Terms of Use
The following notices and licenses comprise together the MIT OpenCourseWare License.
Privacy
MIT OpenCourseWare respects your privacy. We do not collect personally identifiable information about you unless you voluntarily provide it, such as when you provide email contact information to subscribe to the OCW newsletter, send feedback to OCW, or respond to a survey. If you voluntarily provide your email address or other contact information, we might also use it to inform you of changes to OCW, to survey you about your use or opinion of OCW, or to ask for your support. At your request, we will remove your contact information from our files.
We do not make your contact information or any other personally identifiable information available to anyone outside OCW or its service providers (who use the information only for authorized OCW purposes) unless we are legally required to do so.
In addition to the above, we collect certain anonymous (non-personally identifiable) information to help us improve the OCW web site and to evaluate the access and use of OCW materials and the impact of OCW on the worldwide educational community:
We collect information you provide about your use of and satisfaction with OCW through email you send us, through the OCW feedback form, and through OCW surveys, whether or not you voluntarily include your contact information.
We use the Google Analytics web analytics service, which collects certain data about this website’s traffic via a DoubleClick cookie and the standard Google Analytics implementation.  The specific Google Analytics feature we use is Google Analytics Demographics and Interest Reporting.  Google Analytics Demographics and Interest Reporting enables OCW to use information such as user age, gender and interests from Google’s Interest-based advertising or 3rd-party audience data to improve services on the OCW website and to help us understand the aggregate demographics of our users.  We cannot and do not obtain personally-identifiable information from Google Analytics.  OCW does not and will not merge any personally-identifiable information with non-personally identifiable information unless you have been given notice of and have given prior affirmative (i.e. opt-in) consent to that merger.  Google’s ability to use and share information collected by Google Analytics about your visits to OCW is restricted by the
Google Privacy Policy
. You can prevent Google Analytics from recognizing you on return visits to this website by disabling (opting out) the
Google Analytics cookie
. You can also view and change the currently available settings for
Google Ads
.
We may use other web analysis tools that are built into the OCW web site to measure and collect anonymous session information.
We also use “cookies” to improve your OCW web experience and to collect anonymous information about how you use OCW. However, cookies are not required for OCW use. If your browser is configured not to accept cookies, you will still be able to access OCW and its content.
When we report information about OCW access, use, and impact, we report aggregate, non-personally identifiable data. Occasionally, we report quoted feedback from users. We do not attribute feedback to specific individuals unless we obtain permission to use that person’s name along with the feedback.
Creative Commons License
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)
This is a human-readable summary of (and not a substitute for) the
license
.
You are free to:
Share
— copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
Adapt
— remix, transform, and build upon the material
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
Attribution
— You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
Noncommercial
— You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
Share Alike
— If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute your contributions under the same license as the original.
No additional restrictions — You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.
Use of MIT Name
“MIT”, “Massachusetts Institute of Technology”, and its logos and seal are trademarks of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Except for purposes of attribution as required by our Creative Commons License, you may not use MIT’s names or logos, or any variations thereof, without prior written consent of MIT. You may not use the MIT name in any of its forms nor MIT seals or logos for promotional purposes, or in any way that deliberately or inadvertently claims, suggests, or in MIT’s sole judgment gives the appearance or impression of a relationship with or endorsement by MIT.
MIT Interpretation of “Non-commercial”
Non-commercial use
means that users may not sell, profit from, or commercialize OCW materials or works derived from them. The guidelines below are intended to help users determine whether or not their use of OCW materials would be permitted by MIT under the “non-commercial” restriction. Note that there are additional requirements (attribution and share alike) spelled out in our
license
.
Commercialization is prohibited.
Users may
not
directly sell or profit from OCW materials or from works derived from OCW materials.
Example: A commercial education or training business may not offer courses based on OCW materials if students pay a fee for those courses and the business intends to profit as a result.
Determination of commercial vs. non-commercial purpose is based on the use,
not
the user.
Materials may be used by individuals, institutions, governments, corporations, or other business whether for-profit or non-profit so long as the use itself is not a commercialization of the materials or a use that is directly intended to generate sales or profit.
Example: A corporation may use OCW materials for internal professional development and training purposes.
Incidental charges to recover reasonable reproduction costs may be permitted.
Recovery of nominal actual costs for copying small amounts (under 1000 copies) of OCW content on paper or CDs is allowed for educational purposes so long as there is no profit motive and so long as the intended use of the copies is in compliance with all license terms. Students must be informed that the materials are freely available on the OCW Web site and that their purchase of copied materials is optional.
Example: An institution in a remote area has limited Internet access and limited network infrastructure on campus, and a professor offers to create CDs of OCW materials relevant to her course. The professor may recover the costs of creating the CDs.
If you have questions about acceptable use of OCW materials, please contact us.
Permitted Use of AI Training
Unless otherwise specified, OCW content may be used to train, develop, and improve artificial intelligence and machine learning models, provided that such use complies fully with the restrictions set forth below and is consistent with the applicable Creative Commons License associated with the OCW content.
Mandatory Compliance Requirements
Any use of OCW content for AI training purposes shall be subject to the following restrictions:
Attribution
. OCW content used in AI training must include proper attribution to the original creator maintained in all training documentation and any derivative works. Attribution shall be provided in a manner that does not suggest the OCW endorses use of the AI system nor its outputs.
Non-Commercial Use Only
. AI models trained on OCW content shall be used for non-commercial purposes. Non-commercial means not primarily intended for or directed towards commercial advantage or monetary compensation. Any commercial application of OCW content through AI training is strictly prohibited.
ShareAlike Obligations
: Any derivative models, or AI systems that incorporate OCW Content through training, shall be distributed under the same CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license terms, or a compatible CC license as defined by Creative Commons.
Infringement Notification
OCW, prior to making any OCW Materials publicly available, has reviewed all material extensively to determine the correct ownership of the material and obtain the appropriate licenses to make the material available on OCW. OCW will promptly remove any material that is determined to be infringing on the rights of others. If you believe that a portion of OCW Material infringes another’s copyright,
contact us via email
or write to us at:
MIT OpenCourseWare
Attn: Copyright Infringement
600 Technology Square, #2000
Cambridge, MA 02139
If you do not include an electronic signature with your claim, you may be asked to send or fax a follow-up copy with a signature. To file the notification, you must be either the copyright owner of the work or an individual authorized to act on behalf of the copyright owner. Your notification must include:
Identification of the copyrighted work, or, in the case of multiple works at the same location, a representative list of such works at that site.
Identification of the material that is claimed to be infringing or to be the subject of infringing activity. You must include sufficient information, such as a specific URL or other specific identification, for us to locate the material.
Information for us to be able to contact the claimant (e.g., email address, phone number).
A statement that the claimant believes that the use of the material has not been authorized by the copyright owner or an authorized agent.
A statement that the information in the notification is accurate and that the claimant is, or is authorized to act on behalf of, the copyright owner.
Last Updated: 08/11/2026
Accessibility
Creative Commons License
Terms and Conditions
MIT OpenCourseWare is an online publication of materials from over 2,500
          MIT courses, freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around
          the world.
Learn more
Accessibility
Creative Commons License
Terms and Conditions
PROUD MEMBER OF :
© 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare
close
Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, 
        including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible 
        for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement 
        of those sites and/or their content.
Stay Here
Continue
