                       18.S190: Introduction to Metric Spaces
                                              Lecturer: Paige Bright

                                                        IAP 2023



6      January 26, 2023

Where We Go From Here
In this section of the notes (the final one for this class!), we will discuss a bit of the history of metric spaces, and give
a preview of how concepts learned here apply to future classes (i.e. 18.901, 18.102, etc.).
    History: In the early 1900s, the usual approach to mathematics was far less abstract and axiomatic. Hence, at the
time, various spaces that mathematicians studied (such as function spaces as we have studied a bit of in this class)
had different, ununified, notions of convergence. Each space has it’s own notion of the word, which was studied in its
own respect. There were some similarities between these notions, but there was no general understanding of the term.
    Then, in 1906, Fréchet introduced the idea of metric spaces in his Ph.D. Dissertation. This allowed him (and many
other mathematicians) to prove a result for a metric space, and have it be applicable to all other specific examples.
This was the highlight of Lecture 2 of our class– the General Theory of metric spaces.

Remark 1. Fréchet, however, did not coin the term "Metric Space"; the term was coined by Felix Hausdorff.

    In this class, we discussed normed spaces, and saw how such spaces were in fact metric spaces under the metric
induced by the norm. In this way, metric spaces are a generalization of normed spaces.

Question 2. Is there a generalization of metric spaces?

    Yes, there is: Topological spaces.
    18.901: Introduction to Topology: Topological spaces were first defined by Hausdorff in 1914 in his book
"Principles of Set Theory". His book increased the popularity of metric spaces as a mathematical tool.

  Definition 3 (Topology)
  A topology on a set X is a collection T of subsets of X having the following properties:
     1. ∅ and X are in T .

     2. The union of the elements of any subcollection of T is in T .

     3. The intersection of the elements of any finite subcollection of T is in T .
  A set X for which a topology T has been specified is called a topological space.


Question 4. Where has we seem properties like this before?

    We saw these properties when we defined open sets! In fact,


                                                             1
  Definition 5 (Open Set)
  Let (X, T ) be a topological space. Then, U ⊂ X is called an open set if U ∈ T . In other words, we define the
  set in T as open sets. Similarly, V ⊂ X is a closed set if X \ V ∈ T .


Given a metric space (X, d), there is a topology induced by the metric. Intuitively, the topology is defined as the
collection of unions of ϵ-balls for all ϵ > 0. This intuitive definition follows from what we have discussed about metric
spaces: an open set in a metric space is the union of (arbitrarily many) open balls.

Remark 6. To rigorously define the topology induced by the metric: ϵ-balls form a basis for the topology on X.


  Definition 7 (Metrizable)
  We say that a topological space X is metrizable if there exists a metric d on X such that the topology on X is
  the topology induced by d.


Remark 8. I briefly mentioned this on the second day, but again, not every topological space is metrizable!

   At first, the definition of a topology can feel too general to particularly seem useful, but then again the definition
of metric spaces can feel the same way at first. Given a topological space X, we can define notions of neighborhoods,
convergence, and continuity that align with what we have proven for metric spaces.

  Definition 9
  Let (X, TX ) and (Y, TY ) be topological spaces. Then,
     1. A neighborhood U of a point x ∈ X is an open set (i.e. U ∈ TX ) such that x ∈ U.

     2. A sequence {xn } in X converges to x ∈ X if for every neighborhood U of x, there is an N such that xn ∈ U
        for all n ≥ N.

     3. A function f : X → Y is said to be continuous if for each open set V ∈ TY , f −1 (V ) ∈ TX .


This definition may feel very abstract, but as we have shown throughout this class, these definitions are related to our
understanding of convergence and continuity in metric space.
   One may ask, given that topological spaces are a generalization of metric spaces, why we study metric spaces.
To this, I say: why do we study calculus before we study real analysis? In theory, we could prove calculus using real
analysis without having actually taken 18.01 or 18.02. And yet, taking these pre-requisites give us an intuition for
why certain theorems should be true, and in some cases give us an intuition of how to approach proofs. Even more
generally, calculus gives us an intuition for how derivatives of functions "should" look for nice enough functions. Even
if we study weirder functions (or analogously weirder spaces that aren’t metric spaces), having the intuition allows us
to play with abstract objects.
   This is why throughout this class I have tried to draw diagrams when possible to describe what a theorem is actually
saying, or to visualize an example. This technique of drawing an entire "space" as a blob on a chalkboard or on paper
is very useful when trying to approach a problem, which you can see more of if you decide to take a class like 18.901.
   That being said, there is a lot more we can know about metric spaces than we can about topological spaces, just
in the same way we can know more about normed spaces than metric spaces. We have already seen this to a certain
extent. One can show that given a normed space (X, ∥·∥), and two convergent sequences xn → x and yn → y , then

                                                           2
xn + yn → x + y . We cannot say the same about a general metric space, as we don’t inherently have always have a
notion of addition in a metric space. So metric spaces are still an interesting area to study even after someone learns
about topological spaces. In fact, metric spaces are currently an active area of research, even though most research
has ended for topological spaces.
   So so far, we have talked about topological spaces which are more general than metric spaces. Is there a space
that is more specific than a metric space that is useful to study? Yes, and we have already discussed it briefly: normed
spaces.
   18.102: Introduction to Functional Analysis: In Lecture 3 for this class, as a way to motivate the usefulness of
compact sets, we defined normed spaces.

  Recall 10
  A vector space with a norm on it is defined as a normed space.


   And as you showed in PSET 2, a normed space is in fact a metric space, by defining d(x, y ) = ∥x − y ∥: the metric
induced by the norm. In fact, using our concept of convergence, Cauchy sequences, and open sets for metric spaces,
we can define these ideas once again for normed spaces.

  Definition 11
  Let (X, ∥·∥) be a normed space and {xn } be a sequence in X. Let d be the metric induced by the norm. Then,
     1. xn converges to x if and only if for all ϵ > 0, there exists an N such that for all n ≥ N,

                                                    d(xn , x) = ∥xn − x∥ < ϵ.

     2. {xn } is a Cauchy sequence if and only if for all ϵ > 0, there exists an N such that for all n, m ≥ N,

                                                   d(xn , xm ) = ∥xn − xm ∥ < ϵ.

     3. A set A is open in X if for all x ∈ A, there exists an ϵ > 0 such that

                                      Bϵ (x) = {y ∈ X | d(x, y ) = ∥x − y ∥ < ϵ} ⊂ A.


   We similarly have a definition of Cauchy completeness in a normed space (i.e. a space is Cauchy complete if
every Cauchy sequence converges in the space). To be honest, when I first learned about Cauchy sequences real
analysis, Cauchy sequences did not seem all that useful. So, I found it somewhat shocking that Cauchy sequences
were extremely important in functional analysis.

  Definition 12 (Banach Space)
  A Banach space is a normed space that is Cauchy complete with respect to the norm.


Banach spaces are named after Stefan Banach who studied the spaces in 1920-1922.

Remark 13. Fun fact: The term "Banach space" was coined by Fréchet, and the term "Fréchet space" (which we
did not cover in this class) was coined by Banach.




                                                             3
  Example 14
  As we have shown (either in 18.100A/P or in this class), Rn , Cn , and C 0 ([a, b]) are Banach spaces. In fact, one
  can show that the space
                                  C∞ (X) = {f : X → C | f continuous and bounded}

  is a Banach space with respect to the uniform norm on metric spaces.



  Definition 15 (Functional)
  Let (V, ∥·∥) be a normed space. A functional is a bounded linear map from f : V → K where K = R or C
  depending on the context.


   This term is directly related to why 18.102 is called functional analysis! As it turns out, studying normed spaces
is heavily related to studying functionals on those spaces. If you have taken linear algebra, this idea is similar to how
studying a vector space is heavily related to studying the dual space of that vector space, but I digress.

  Example 16
  One can show, which some work, that the set of functionals, T , are Cauchy complete under the operator norm,
  given by
                                           ∥T ∥op = sup v ∈ V ; ∥v ∥ = 1|T v |.

  One can similarly define this operator norm for bounded linear maps between normed spaces.


Remark 17. 18.102 is also heavily related to quantum mechanics, so if you are someone interested in physics/this
concept, a class like functional analysis may be interesting to take.

   18.101: Analysis and Manifolds I briefly want to mention how this class relates to (smooth) manifold theory.
You can loosely think of a manifold as a smooth enough blob out in space that is locally flat (i.e. close up to the blob,
it looks like Euclidean space). Some classic examples of manifolds include the sphere and open subsets of Euclidean
space.
   In the rigorous definition of a manifold, we suppose that the space is metrizable! We don’t often directly use the
metric itself, but rather we use the fact that ϵ-balls are open sets on the manifold. From this concept, you can develop
the theory of/study smooth functions, integration, vector fields, and much much more on manifolds. Essentially,
the idea is to develop a concept of multivariable calculus that is compatible to calculus on Euclidean space, but for
manifolds!
   18.152: Introduction to Partial Differential Equations: I can’t say too much about this class as I haven’t taken
it myself, but just to bring it up again, the Banach fixed point theorem is very useful for proofs in this class regarding
differential equations as we have seen.
   On that note, I want to discuss one specific problem in partial differential equations that actually motivated the
development of material in 18.100x classes: the Dirichlet problem. Consider some subset Ω ⊂ R2 , and picture this
set as a metal plate. Suppose I heated the plate with a blowtorch for a certain amount of time. After a long period
of time, the plate will reach thermal equilibrium. This is represented by the steady-state heat equation:

                                                     ∂2u    ∂2u
                                                          +      =0
                                                     ∂x 2   ∂y 2


                                                            4
where u(x, y ) is the temperature at point (x, y ). This differential operator is so important, we abbreviate it with ∆,
referred to as the Laplace operator or Laplacian. Suppose that I also knew the temperature on the boundary of this
plate (denoted ∂Ω). Let u = f on ∂Ω (i.e. f is the temperature on the boundary of the plate).

Question 18. Can we find the temperature distribution on Ω? Is this temperature distribution unique?

   This question is known as the Dirichlet problem (in R2 ). To restate the question, we want to solve the differential
equation                                           
                                                   ∆u = 0      on Ω
                                                   u   =f
                                                       ∂Ω

for some u ∈ C 2 (R2 ) and f ∈ C 0 (R2 ).
   Early on, mathematicians studied this problem by studying the "Dirichlet energy" of u, given by the function
                                                        Z
                                                      1
                                              E(u) =       |∇u|2 dA.
                                                      2 Ω

They considered the set of all the C 2 (Ω) with the given boundary condition and let Einf be the infimal energy of
functions in this set. Dirichlet and others showed that if Einf is the energy of a function u ∈ C 2 with the given
boundary condition, then ∆u = 0. Thus, u would be a solution to the Dirichlet problem! However, this raises the
question:
Question 19 (Question 1). Does there exist a C 2 function u with the given boundary condition, such that E(u) = Einf ?
   If the answer is yes, then we have solved the problem! How might we approach finding such a function u? We
could take a sequence of functions un such that E(un ) → E(u)! However, this raises yet another question:
Question 20 (Question 2). Does un converge in C 2 to a limit function u?
   If this is true, then we can easily show that E(u) = Einf and then we have solve the problem! In fact, if un converges
in C 1 to u, then E(u) = Einf . This raises the following question again:
Question 21 (Question 3). Consider the set of functions u ∈ C 2 with the given boundary data, with E(u) at most
E0 > 0. Is this set of functions compact in C 2 or C 1 ?
   If this is true, then we have sequential compactness, which means we can find a subsequence unk converging to a
limit u with E(u) = Einf .
   The answer to question 3, is no. This set of functions it not compact in either C 1 or C 2 . This ruins this entire,
arguably very intuitive approach to the problem. Even though this idea didn’t solve the problem though, it did highlight
some key issues at play. In fact, the ideas of convergence and compactness in a metric space were developed partly to
see if this approach to the Dirichlet problem works or not. It turns out, this approach doesn’t work.
   The answer to question 2 is also no. We can in fact build a sequence of C 2 functions un with the given boundary
condition such that E(un ) → Einf , and yet un fails to converge in C 1 (let alone C 2 ). One can show that a function
with zero boundary data and very small Dirichlet energy can still have a large C 1 norm.
   However, the answer to question 1 is yes. Eventually, mathematicians were able to solve the Dirichlet problem,
using techniques beyond the scope of this class. While we won’t discuss the solution, this rich history highlights how
mathematical concepts were/are developed to solve problems like this. This topic is sometimes talked about more in
18.102, and in some graduate level classes.
   Thank you for taking this class with me this IAP. It has been a fun time developing the material and teaching
the class. Please feel free to send me any feedback by emailing me or talking to me after class. Have a great spring
semester!

                                                            5
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu




18.S190 Introduction to Metric Spaces
Independent Activities Period (IAP) 2023




For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
