 
 
Doob’s Optional Stopping Theorem 
The Doob’s optional stopping time theorem is contained in many basic 
texts on probability and Martingales. (See, for example, Theorem 10.10 of 
Probability with Martingales, by David Williams, 1991.) The essential 
content of the theorem is that you can’t make money (in expectation) by 
buying and selling an asset whose price is a martingale. Precisely, the 
theorem states that if you buy the asset at some time and adopt any 
strategy at all for deciding when to sell it, then the expected price at the 
time you sell is the price you originally paid. Thus—if market price is a 
martingale—you cannot make money in expectation by “timing the 
market.” 
Let 
be the probability space. Let T be a map from 
to the set of 
positive integers. We think of T (!) as giving the time at which the asset 
will be sold if the price sequence is S(0), S(1), S(2), . . . (where each S(i) is 
a random variable, i.e., a real-valued function of !). We say that T is a 
stopping time if the event that T (!) = n depends only on the values S(i) 
for i ≤ n. In other words, the decision of whether to sell the stock at time 
n depends only on the history of the stock up until time n, and not on the 
future values of the stock (which the investor hasn’t seen yet). 
Doob’s Optional Stopping Theorem: If the sequence 
S(0), S(1), S(2), . . . is a bounded martingale, and T is a stopping time, 
then the expected value of S(T ) is S(0). 
Most real world asset prices are not martingales, even in theory. So why is 
this theorem relevant to ﬁnance? 
1. Many asset prices behave approximately like martingales in the short 
term. 
2. According to the fundamental theorem of asset pricing, as 
presented in Zastawniak and Capi´nski (see the text for the precise 
S(n) 
conditions of the theorem), the discounted price 
, where A is a 
A(n) 
risk-free asset, is a martingale with respected to the risk neutral 
probability. 
3. Sequences of conditional expectations of a quantity—involving 
conditioning on increasing amounts of information—are martingales. 
For example, let C be the amount of oil available for drilling under a 
particular piece of land. Suppose that ten geological tests are done 
1 

that will ultimately determine the value of C. Let Cn be the 
conditional expectation of C given the outcome of the ﬁrst n of 
these tests. Then the sequence C0, C1, C2, . . . , C10 = C is a 
martingale. 
SOME MARTINGALE PROBLEMS: 
1. Suppose Harriet has 7 dollars. Her plan is to make one dollar bets on 
fair coin tosses until her wealth reaches either 0 or 50, and then to go 
home. What is the expected amount of money that Harriet will have 
when she goes home? What is the probability that she will have 50 
when she goes home? 
2. Consider a contract that at time N will be worth either 100 or 0. Let 
S(n) be its price at time 0 ≤ n ≤ N. If S(n) is a martingale, and 
S(0) = 47, then what is the probability that the contract will be 
worth 100 at time N? 
3. Pedro plans to buy the contract in the previous problem at time 0 
and sell it the ﬁrst time T at which the price goes above 55 or below 
15. What is the expected value of S(T )? 
4. Suppose S(N) is with probability one either 100 or 0 and that 
S(0) = 50. Suppose further there is at least a sixy percent 
probability that the price will at some point dip to below 40 and 
then subsequently rise to above 60 before time N. Prove that S(n) 
cannot be a martingale. 
2 

 
 
 
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu 
18.600 Probability and Random Variables 
Fall 2019 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms. 
