=== PAGE 1 ===
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
6.042J/18.062J, Spring ’15: Mathematics for Computer Science 
March 11 
Prof. Albert R Meyer & Prof. Adam Chlipala 
revised Thursday 12th March, 2015, 11:19 
Problem Set 6 
Due: March 20 
Reading: Chapter 8.11. RSA Cryptosystem. Chapter 9. Directed Graphs through 9.4. Walk Relations in the
course textbook.
Problem 1. 
Suppose the RSA modulus n D pq is the product of distinct 200 digit primes p and q. A message m 2 Œ0::n/ 
is called dangerous if gcd.m; n/ D p or gcd.m; n/ D q, because such an m can be used to factor n and so 
crack RSA. 
Estimate the fraction of messages in Œ0::n/ that are dangerous to the nearest order of magnitude. 
Problem 2. (a) Give an example of a digraph with two vertices u ¤ v such that there is a path from u to v 
and also a path from v to u, but no cycle containing both u and v. 
(b) Prove that if there is a positive length walk in digraph that starts and ends at node v, then there is a 
cycle that contains v. 
Problem 3. 
Suppose that there are n chickens in a farmyard. Chickens are rather aggressive birds that tend to establish 
dominance in relationships by pecking; hence the term “pecking order.” In particular, for each pair of distinct 
chickens, either the ﬁrst pecks the second or the second pecks the ﬁrst, but not both. We say that chicken u 
virtually pecks chicken v if either: 
 Chicken u directly pecks chicken v, or 
 Chicken u pecks some other chicken w who in turn pecks chicken v. 
A chicken that virtually pecks every other chicken is called a king chicken. 
We can model this situation 
with a chicken digraph whose vertices are chickens with an edge from 
chicken u to chicken v precisely when u pecks v. In the graph in Figure 1, three of the four chickens 
are kings. Chicken c is not a king in this example since it does not peck chicken b and it does not peck any 
chicken that pecks chicken b. Chicken a is a king since it pecks chicken d , who in turn pecks chickens b 
and c. 
In general, a tournament digraph is a digraph with exactly one edge between each pair of distinct vertices. 
(a) Deﬁne a 10-chicken tournament graph with a king chicken that has outdegree 1. 
(b) Describe a 5-chicken tournament graph in which every player is a king. 
(c) Prove 
Theorem (King Chicken Theorem). The chicken with the largest outdegree in an n-chicken tournament is a 
king. 
2015, Eric Lehman, F Tom Leighton, Albert R Meyer. This work is available under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 license. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
king a
b king 
king 
not a king
d
c 
Problem Set 6 
Figure 1 A 4-chicken tournament in which chickens a, b, and d are kings. 
. 
The King Chicken Theorem means that if the player with the most victories is defeated by another player x, 
then at least he/she defeats some third player that defeats x. In this sense, the player with the most victories 
has some sort of bragging rights over every other player. Unfortunately, as Figure 1 illustrates, there can be 
many other players with such bragging rights, even some with fewer victories. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu
6.042J / 18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science
Spring 2015 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
