=== PAGE 1 ===
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
6.042J/18.062J, Spring ’15: Mathematics for Computer Science
February 13
Prof. Albert R Meyer & Prof. Adam Chlipala
revised Tuesday 10th February, 2015, 07:56
In-Class Problems Week 2, Fri.
Problem 1.
Prove by truth table that OR distributes over AND, namely,
P OR .Q AND R/
is equivalent to
.P OR Q/ AND .P OR R/
(1)
Problem 2.
This problem1 examines whether the following speciﬁcations are satisﬁable:
1. If the ﬁle system is not locked, then
(a) new messages will be queued.
(b) new messages will be sent to the messages buffer.
(c) the system is functioning normally, and conversely, if the system is functioning normally, then
the ﬁle system is not locked.
2. If new messages are not queued, then they will be sent to the messages buffer.
3. New messages will not be sent to the message buffer.
(a) Begin by translating the ﬁve speciﬁcations into propositional formulas using four propositional vari-
ables:
L WWD ﬁle system locked;
Q WWD new messages are queued;
B WWD new messages are sent to the message buffer;
N WWD system functioning normally:
(b) Demonstrate that this set of speciﬁcations is satisﬁable by describing a single truth assignment for the
variables L; Q; B; N and verifying that under this assignment, all the speciﬁcations are true.
(c) Argue that the assignment determined in part (b) is the only one that does the job.
Problem 3.
Propositional logic comes up in digital circuit design using the convention that T corresponds to 1 and F to
0. A simple example is a 2-bit half-adder circuit. This circuit has 3 binary inputs, a1; a0 and b, and 3 binary
outputs, c; s1; s0. The 2-bit word a1a0 gives the binary representation of an integer, k, between 0 and 3. The
1Revised from Rosen, 5th edition, Exercise 1.1.36
2015, Eric Lehman, F Tom Leighton, Albert R Meyer. This work is available under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 license.

=== PAGE 2 ===
2
In-Class Problems Week 2, Fri.
3-bit word cs1s0 gives the binary representation of k C b. The third output bit, c, is called the ﬁnal carry
bit.
So if k and b were both 1, then the value of a1a0 would be 01 and the value of the output cs1s0 would
010, namely, the 3-bit binary representation of 1 C 1.
In fact, the ﬁnal carry bit equals 1 only when all three binary inputs are 1, that is, when k D 3 and b D 1.
In that case, the value of cs1s0 is 100, namely, the binary representation of 3 C 1.
This 2-bit half-adder could be described by the following formulas:
c0 D b
s0 D a0 XOR c0
c1 D a0 AND c0
the carry into column 1
s1 D a1 XOR c1
c2 D a1 AND c1
the carry into column 2
c D c2:
(a) Generalize the above construction of a 2-bit half-adder to an nC1 bit half-adder with inputs an; : : : ; a1; a0
and b and outputs c; sn; : : : ; s1; s0. That is, give simple formulas for si and ci for 0  i  n C 1, where ci
is the carry into column i C 1, and c D cnC1.
(b) Write similar deﬁnitions for the digits and carries in the sum of two nC1-bit binary numbers an : : : a1a0
and bn : : : b1b0.
Visualized as digital circuits, the above adders consist of a sequence of single-digit half-adders or adders
strung together in series. These circuits mimic ordinary pencil-and-paper addition, where a carry into a
column is calculated directly from the carry into the previous column, and the carries have to ripple across
all the columns before the carry into the ﬁnal column is determined. Circuits with this design are called
ripple-carry adders. Ripple-carry adders are easy to understand and remember and require a nearly minimal
number of operations. But the higher-order output bits and the ﬁnal carry take time proportional to n to
reach their ﬁnal values.
(c) How many of each of the propositional operations does your adder from part (b) use to calculate the
sum?
Problem 4.
When the mathematician says to his student, “If a function is not continuous, then it is not differentiable,”
then letting D stand for “differentiable” and C for continuous, the only proper translation of the mathemati-
cian’s statement would be
NOT.C/ IMPLIES NOT.D/;
or equivalently,
D IMPLIES C:
But when a mother says to her son, “If you don’t do your homework, then you can’t watch TV,” then
letting T stand for “can watch TV” and H for “do your homework,” a reasonable translation of the mother’s
statement would be
NOT.H/ IFF NOT.T /;
or equivalently,
H IFF T:
Explain why it is reasonable to translate these two IF-THEN statements in different ways into proposi-
tional formulas.

=== PAGE 3 ===
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu
6.042J / 18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science
Spring 2015
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
