=== PAGE 1 ===
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
6.042J/18.062J, Spring ’15: Mathematics for Computer Science
May 8
Prof. Albert R Meyer & Prof. Adam Chlipala
revised Wednesday 13th May, 2015, 18:16
In-Class Problems Week 13, Fri.
Problem 1.
A herd of cows is stricken by an outbreak of cold cow disease. The disease lowers a cow’s body temperature
from normal levels, and a cow will die if its temperature goes below 90 degrees F. The disease epidemic is
so intense that it lowered the average temperature of the herd to 85 degrees. Body temperatures as low as 70
degrees, but no lower, were actually found in the herd.
(a) Use Markov’s Bound to prove that at most 3/4 of the cows could survive.
(b) Suppose there are 400 cows in the herd. Show that the bound from part (a) is the best possible by giving
an example set of temperatures for the cows so that the average herd temperature is 85 and 3/4 of the cows
will have a high enough temperature to survive.
(c) Notice that the results of part (b) are purely arithmetic facts about averages, not about probabilities.
But you veriﬁed the claim in part (a) by applying Markov’s bound on the deviation of a random variable.
Justify this approach by regarding the temperature, T , of a cow as a random variable. Carefully specify the
probability space on which T is deﬁned: what are the outcomes? what are their probabilities? Explain the
precise connection between properties of T and average herd temperature that justiﬁes the application of
Markov’s Bound.
Problem 2.
A gambler plays 120 hands of draw poker, 60 hands of black jack, and 20 hands of stud poker per day. He
wins a hand of draw poker with probability 1/6, a hand of black jack with probability 1/2, and a hand of stud
poker with probability 1/5.
(a) What is the expected number of hands the gambler wins in a day?
(b) What would the Markov bound be on the probability that the gambler will win at least 108 hands on a
given day?
(c) Assume that the outcomes of the card games are pairwise, but possibly not mutually, independent.
What is the variance of the number of hands won per day? You may answer with a numerical expression
that is not completely evaluated.
(d) What would the Chebyshev bound be on the probability that the gambler will win at least 108 hands on
a given day? You may answer with a numerical expression that is not completely evaluated.
2015, Eric Lehman, F Tom Leighton, Albert R Meyer. This work is available under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 license.

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
In-Class Problems Week 13, Fri. 
Problem 3. 
The hat-check staff has had a long day serving at a party, and at the end of the party they simply return the 
n checked hats in a random way such that the probability that any particular person gets their own hat back 
is 1=n. 
Let Xi be the indicator variable for the ith person getting their own hat back. Let Sn be the total number 
of people who get their own hat back. 
(a) What is the expected number of people who get their own hat back? 
(b) Write a simple formula for ExŒXi . Xj J for i ¤ j .

 
Hint: What is Pr Xj D 1 j Xi D 1 ? 
(c) Explain why you cannot use the variance of sums formula to calculate VarŒSnJ. 
(d) Show that ExŒ.Sn/2J D 2. Hint: .Xi /2 D Xi . 
(e) What is the variance of Sn? 
(f) Show that there is at most a 1% chance that more than 10 people get their own hat back. 
Supplementary Problems 
Problem 4. 
Let Kn be the complete graph with n vertices. Each of the edges of the graph will be randomly assigned 
one of the colors red, green, or blue. The assignments of colors to edges are mutually independent, and the 
probability of an edge being assigned red is r, blue is b, and green is g (so r C b C g D 1). 
A set of three vertices in the graph is called a triangle. A triangle is monochromatic if the three edges 
connecting the vertices are all the same color. 
(a) Let m be the probability that any given triangle, T , is monochromatic. Write a simple formula for m in 
terms of r; b; and g. 
(b) Let IT be the indicator variable for whether T is monochromatic. Write simple formulas in terms of 
m; r; b; and g for ExŒIT J and VarŒIT J. 
Let T and U be distinct triangles. 
(c) What is the probability that T and U are both monochromatic if they do not share an edge?. . . if they 
do share an edge? 
1
Now assume r D b D g D . 
3 
(d) Show that IT and IU are independent random variables. 
(e) Let M be the number of monochromatic triangles. Write simple formulas in terms of n and m for 
ExŒM J and VarŒM J. 
(f) Let  WWD ExŒM J. Use Chebyshev’s Bound to prove that 
p
1
PrŒjM - j >
 log J  
:
log  
(g) Conclude that 
p
lim PrŒjM - j >
 log J D 0 
n!1 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
In-Class Problems Week 13, Fri. 
Problem 5. 
Let R be a positive integer valued random variable. 
(a) If ExŒRJ D 2, how large can VarŒRJ be? 
(b) How large can ExŒ1=RJ be? 
(c) If R  2, that is, the only values of R are 1 and 2, how large can VarŒRJ be? 

=== PAGE 4 ===
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu
6.042J / 18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science
Spring 2015
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
