12. Presentations and Groups of small order 
Deﬁnition-Lemma 12.1. Let A be a set. A word in A is a string of 
elements of A and their inverses. We say that the word wi is obtained 
from w by a reduction, if we can get from w to wi by repeatedly 
applying the following rule, 
−1 
−1
• replace aa
(or a
a) by the empty string. 
i
Given any word w, the reduced word w associated to w is any 
word obtained from w by reduction, such that wi cannot be reduced any 
further. 
Given two words w1 and w2 of A, the concatenation of w1 and w2 
is the word w = w1w2. The empty word is denoted e. 
The set of all reduced words is denoted FA. With product deﬁned 
as the reduced concatenation, this set becomes a group, called the free 
group with generators A. 
It is interesting to look at examples. Suppose that A contains one 
element a. An element of FA = Fa is a reduced word, using only a and 
−1 
−1
−1
−1
a
. The word w = aaaa
a
aaa is a string using a and a
. Given 
any such word, we pass to the reduction wi of w. This means cancelling 
as much as we can, and replacing strings of a’s by the corresponding 
power. Thus 
−1 
w = aaa aaa 
= aaaa 
4 
i
= a = w , 
where equality means up to reduction. Thus the free group on one 
generator is isomorphic to Z. 
The free group on two generators is much more complicated and it 
is not abelian. A typical reduced word might be 
3b−2
5b13 
a 
a
. 
Clearly Fa,b has quite a few elements. Free groups have a very useful 
universal property. 
Lemma 12.2. Let F = FS be a free group with generators S. Let G 
be any group. Suppose that we are given a function f : S −→ G. 
Then there is a unique homomorphism 
φ: F −→ G 
1
 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


/ 
that extends f. In other words, the following diagram commutes  
f
S 
/ G 
∩ 
 
φ 
F.
Proof. Given a reduced word w in F , send this to the element given 
by replacing every letter by its image in G. It is easy to see that this 
is a homomorphism, as there are no relations between the elements of 
F . 
D 
In other words if S = {a, b} and you send a to g and b to h then 
2b−3
2h−3
you have no choice but to send w = a
a to g
g, whatever that 
element is in G. 
This gives us a convenient way to present a group G. Pick generators 
S of G. Then we get a homomorphism 
φ: FS −→ G. 
As S generates G, φ is surjective. Let the kernel be H. By the First 
Isomorphism Theorem, G is isomorphic to FS /H. To describe H, we 
need to write down generators R for H. These generators are called 
relations, since they describe relations amongst the generators, such 
that if we mod out by these relations, then we get G. 
Deﬁnition 12.3. A presentation of a group G is a choice of gen­
erators S of G and a description of the relations R amongst these 
generators. 
It is probably easiest to give some examples. 
Let G be a cyclic group of order n. Pick a generator a. Then we get 
a homorphism 
φ: Fa −→ G. 
The kernel of φ is equal to H, which contains all elements of the form 
am, where m is a multiple of n, H = (an). Thus a presentation for G 
is given by the single generator a with the single relation an = e. 
Take the group D4, the symmetries of the square. This has two 
natural generators g and f, where g is rotation through π/2 and f is 
reﬂection about a diagonal. 
Thus we get a map 
Fa,b −→ D4 
given by sending a to g and b to f. What are the relations, that is, 
what is the kernel? Well f 2 = e and g4 = e, so two obvious elements 
2
 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


of the kernel are f 2 and g4 . On the other hand 
fgf −1 = g −1 . 
Using this relation, any word w can be manipulated into the form 
f i gj , 
where i ∈{0, 1} and j ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}. Since this gives eight elements 
of the quotient and there are eight elements of G, it follows that the 
kernel is generated by 
f 2 , g 4, fgf −1 g. 
The relations are 
f 2
4 
−1 
= e, g = e, fgf −1 = g
. 
Deﬁnition 12.4. Let S be a set. The free abelian group AS gen­
erated by S is the quotient of FS , the free group generated by S, and 
the relations R given by the commutators of the elements of S. 
Let S = {a, b}. Then Aa,b is isomorphic to Z × Z. Similarly for any 
ﬁnite set. 
Lemma 12.5. Let S be any set and let G be any abelian group. Given 
any map f : S −→ G there is a unique homomorphism 
AS −→ G. 
Proof. As FS is a free group, there is a unique homomorphism 
φ: FS −→ G. 
As G is abelian the kernel of φ contains the commutator subgroup. 
But then, as AS is by deﬁnition the quotient of FS by the commutator 
subgroup, there is a unique map AS −→ G extending f. 
D 
Lemma 12.6. Let G be any ﬁnitely generated abelian group. 
Then G is a quotient of Z × Z × Z × · · · × Z. 
Proof. Pick a ﬁnite set of generators S of G. By (12.5) there is a unique 
homomorphism 
AS −→ G. 
As S generates G this map is surjective. On the other hand AS is 
isomorphic to a direct sum of copies of Z. 
D 
Theorem 12.7. Let G be a ﬁnitely generated abelian group. 
Then G is isomorphic to Z × Z × · · · × Z × T , where T may be 
presented uniquely as either, 
(1) Zq1 × Zq2 × · · · × Zqr , where each qi is a power of a prime, or 
(2) Zm1 × Zm2 × · · · × Zmr , where mi|mi+1. 
3
 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


Given this, we can classify all abelian groups of a ﬁxed ﬁnite order. 
For example, take n = 60 = 22 · 3 · 5. Then we have 
Z2 × Z2 × Z3 × Z5 
or 
Z4 × Z3 × Z5, 
using the ﬁrst representation, or 
Z2 × Z30 
or 
Z60 
using the second representation. 
Finally let me mention that in general if one is given generators and 
relations, it can be very hard to describe the resulting quotient. 
Theorem 12.8. There is no eﬀective algorithm to solve any of the 
following problems, 
Given relations R, decide if 
(1) two words w1 and w2 are equivalent, modulo the relations. 
(2) a word w is equivalent, modulo the relations, to the identity. 
Succintly, the method of representing groups by generators and re­
lations is an art not a science. 
Let’s now try to classify all groups of order at most ten, up to iso­
morphism. To do this we recall some basic results. First note that for 
every natural number n, there is at least one group of order n, namely 
a cyclic group of order n. 
Lemma 12.9. Let G be a group of order a prime p. 
Then G is cyclic. 
Proof. Pick any element g of G other than the identity and let H be 
the subgroup generated by g. Then the order of H is greater than one 
and divides the order of G, by Lagrange. As the order of G is a prime, 
it follows that H = G so that G is cyclic, generated by any element 
other than the identity. 
D 
Look at the numbers from one to ten. Of these, 2, 3, 5 and 7 are 
prime. Thus by (12.9) there is exactly one group of order 1, 2, 3, 5 and 
7, up to isomorphism. 
The numbers that are left are 4, 6, 8, 9 and 10. The next thing to 
do is to start looking for intersting subgroups. The easiest way to ﬁnd 
a subgroup, is to pick an element and look at the cyclic subgroup that 
it generates. 
Lemma 12.10. Let G be a group in which every element has order 
two. 
Then G is abelian. 
4 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


Proof. Suppose that a, b and ab all have order two. We will show that 
a and b commute. By assumption 
e = (ab)2 
= abab. 
As a and b are their own inverses, multiplying on the left by a and then 
b, we get 
ba = ab. 
D 
On the other hand, the classiﬁcation of ﬁnite abelian groups is easy. 
There are two of order 4, 
Z2 × Z2, 
Z4, 
one of order six, 
Z6, 
three of order 8, 
Z2 × Z2 × Z2, 
Z2 × Z4, 
Z8, 
two of order nine, 
Z3 × Z3, 
Z9, 
and one of order ten 
Z10. 
Let us start with order four. Let g ∈ G be an element of G other than 
the identity. Then the order of g is 2 or 4. If it is four then G is cyclic. 
Otherwise g has order two. If G is not cyclic then, every element, other 
than the identity, must have order two, and G is abelian, by (12.10). 
Thus every group of order 4 is abelian. 
Now suppose that G has order six. If G is abelian, then G is cyclic. 
Otherwise, every element of G has order two or three. By (12.10) not 
every element has order two. Let a be an element of order three. Let 
H = (a). 
Lemma 12.11. Let G be a group and let H be a subgroup of index 
two. 
Then H is normal in G. 
Proof. It suﬃces to prove that the set of left cosets is equal to the set 
of right cosets. 
The left cosets, partition the elements of G into two parts. One 
part is equal to H. By deﬁnition o a partition, the other part is the 
complement of H. By the same token, the right cosets consist of H 
and its complement. 
Hence both partitions are equal and H is normal. 
D 
5 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


Pick b ∈ G, where b /∈ H. As H has index two, G/H has order two. 
Thus b2 ∈ H. If b2  
e, then b2 = a or b2 = a2
= 
and b has order six, 
a contradiction. Thus b2 = e and b has order two. Clearly G = (a, b). 
Consider the conjugate of a by b, 
bab−1 . 
As H is normal in G, bab−1 ∈ G, so that bab−1 = a or bab−1 = a2 . If 
the former then ab = ba and G is abelian. Otherwise G is isomorphic 
to D3 as they both have the same presentation. Thus there are two 
groups of order 6, a cyclic group and S3. 
Now suppose that the order is ten. If G is not abelian, then every 
element, other than the identity must have order 2 or 5. Not every 
element has order two. Let a be an element of order ﬁve. Let H = (a). 
Then H has index two. Thus H is normal in G. Let b ∈ G, b /∈ H. As 
before b2 = e. Once again consider the conjugate of a by b, 
bab−1 
i
 
This is an element of H, of order ﬁve. Thus bab−1 = a , some i = 0. 
= 
−1
Suppose that i  
1, else G is abelian. If i = 4, then bab−1 = a
and 
G is isomorphic to D5, the symmetries of a pentagon. 
Suppose that bab−1 = a2 . Then 
a = b2ab−2 
= b(bab−1)b−1 
= ba2b−1 
= (bab−1)(bab−1 
2
2 
= a a 
4 
= a . 
4
3 
3
But then a = a and so a = e, a contradiction. Similarly bab−1  
.
= a
Thus a group of order ten is either cyclic or isomorphic to D5. 
Now suppose that G is a non-abelian group of order eight. There 
are no elements of order eight, as G is not cyclic and not every element 
has order two, by (12.10). 
Thus G has an element a of order 4. Let H = (a). Then H has 
b2
3
∈ H.
=
index two in G. Pick b ∈ G, with b /
Then b2 ∈ H. 
 
a, a , 
otherwise b has order 8. 
There are two possibilities. b2 = e. In this case, consider as before, 
the conjugate of a by b. As before, we must have bab−1 = a3 and we 
have the dihedral group D4. Call this group G1. 
6 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


 
Otherwise b2 = a2 . Call this group G2. Again we consider the 
conjugate of a by b. It must be a3 as before. Note that this rule 
translates to ba = a3b. Let H = (a) and K = (b). Then G = (a, b) = 
H ∨ K = HK, where we use the rule 
ba = a 3b, 
to prove that HK is closed under products and inverses, so that HK is 
a subgroup of G. We will see later that there is indeed a group of order 
eight with this presentation. Note that G1 and G2 are not isomorphic. 
Indeed G1 has only two elements of order 4, a and a3, whilst G2 has at 
least three, a, a3 and b. 
Finally consider the case where G has order nine. Then every element 
of G, other than the identity must have order 3. Pick an element a = e 
and let H = (a). Let S be the set of left cosets of H in G. Then S has 
three elements. As in the proof of Cayley’s Theorem there is a group 
homomorphism 
φ: G −→ A(S) r S3 
We send g ∈ G to the permutation of S that sends aH to gaH. The 
kernel of φ is a normal subgroup of G that is contained in H. The 
image of φ has order at most six, and as G has order nine, the kernel 
of φ cannot be the trivial subgroup. It follows that Ker φ = H so that 
H is normal in G. 
Pick b ∈ G − H. Then bH is an element of G/H and so it must have 
order three. In particular b3 ∈ H. But then b3 = e, else b has order 
nine. Let K = (b). By symmetry K is normal in G. As H ∩ K = {e}, 
it follows that the elements of H and K commute. But G = (a, b). 
Thus G is abelian, a contradiction. 
7 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra
Prof. James McKernan


MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
18.703 Modern Algebra
Spring 2013
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
