1. Groups 
Suppose that we take an equilateral triangle and look at its symmetry 
group. There are two obvious sets of symmetries. First one can rotate 
the triangle through 120◦ . Suppose that we choose clockwise as the 
positive direction and denote rotation through 120◦ as R. It is natural 
to represent rotation through 240◦ as R2, where we think of R2 as the 
eﬀect of applying R twice. 
If we apply R three times, represented by R3, we would be back where 
we started. In other words we ought to include the trivial symmetry 
I, as a symmetry of the triangle (in just the same way that we think 
of zero as being a number). Note that the symmetry rotation through 
120◦ anticlockwise, could be represented as R−1 . Of course this is the 
same as rotation through 240◦ clockwise, so that R−1 = R2 . 
The other obvious sets of symmetries are ﬂips. For example one can 
draw a vertical line through the top corner and ﬂip about this line. 
Call this operation F = F1. Note that F 2 = I, representing the fact 
that ﬂipping twice does nothing. 
There are two other axes to ﬂip about, corresponding to the fact that 
there are three corners. Putting all this together we have 
F3
F1
F2
R
A
B
C
Figure 1. Symmetries of an equilateral triangle 
The set of symmetries we have created so far is then equal to 
{ I, R, R2, F1, F2, F3 }. 
Is this all? The answer is yes, and it is easy to see this, once one 
notices the following fact; any symmetry is determined by its action 
on the vertices of the triangle. In fact a triangle is determined by its 
vertices, so this is clear. Label the vertices A, B and C, where A starts 
at the top, B is the bottom right, and C is the bottom left. 
1 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


Now in total there are at most six diﬀerent permutations of the 
letters A, B and C. We have already given six diﬀerent symmetries, 
so we must in fact have exhausted the list of symmetries. 
Note that given any two symmetries, we can always consider what 
happens when we apply ﬁrst one symmetry and then another. However 
note that the notation RF is ambiguous. Should we apply R ﬁrst and 
then F or F ﬁrst and then R? We will adopt the convention that RF 
means ﬁrst apply F and then apply R. 
Now RF is a symmetry of the triangle and we have listed all of them. 
Which one is it? Well the action of RF on the vertices will take 
A −→ A −→ B 
B −→ C −→ A 
C −→ B −→ C. 
In total then A is sent to B, B is sent to A and C is sent to C. As 
this symmetry ﬁxes one of the vertices, it must be a ﬂip. In fact it is 
equal to F3. 
Let us now compute the symmetry FR. Well the action on the 
vertices is as follows 
A −→ B −→ C 
B −→ C −→ B 
C −→ A −→ A. 
So in total the action on the vertices is given as A goes to C, B goes 
to B and C goes to A. Again this symmetry ﬁxes the vertex B and so 
it is equal to F2. 
Thus F3 = RF = 
FR = F2. 
Let us step back a minute and consider what (algebraic) structure 
these examples give us. We are given a set (the set of symmetries) and 
an operation on this set, that is a rule that tells us how to multiply (in 
a formal sense) any two elements. We have an identity (the symmetry 
that does nothing). As this symmetry does nothing, composing with 
this symmetry does nothing (just as multiplying by the number one 
does nothing). 
Finally, given any symmetry there is an inverse symmetry which 
undoes the action of the symmetry (R represents rotation through 120◦ 
clockwise, and R−1 represents rotation through 120◦ anticlockwise, thus 
undoing the action of R). 
2 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


Deﬁnition 1.1. A group G is a set together with two operations (or 
more simply, functions), one called multiplication m: G × G −→ G 
and the other called the inverse i : G −→ G. These operations obey 
the following rules 
(1)  Associativity: For every g, h and k ∈ G,  
m(m(g, h), k) = m(g, m(h, k)).  
(2) Identity: There is an element e in the group such that for 
every g ∈ G  
m(g, e) = g  
and 
m(e, g) = g. 
(3)  Inverse: For every g ∈ G, 
m(g, i(g)) = e = m(i(g), g). 
It is customary to use diﬀerent (but equivalent) notation to denote 
the operations of multiplication and inverse. One possibility is to use 
the ordinary notation for multiplication 
m(x, y) = xy. 
The inverse is then denoted 
i(g) = g −1 .  
The three rules above will then read as follows  
(1)  
(gh)k = g(hk).  
(2)  
ge = g = eg  
(3) 
−1 
−1 
gg 
= eg g. 
Another alternative is to introduce a slight diﬀerent notation for the 
multiplication rule, something like ∗. In this case the three rules come 
out as 
(1)  
(g ∗ h) ∗ k = g ∗ (h ∗ k).  
(2)  
g ∗ e = g = e ∗ g  
(3)  
g ∗ g −1 = e = g −1 ∗ g.  
3 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


The key thing to realise is that the multiplication rule need not have 
any relation to the more usual mutliplication rule of ordinary numbers. 
Let us see some examples of groups. Can we make the empty set into 
a group? How would we deﬁne the multiplication? Well the answer 
is that there is nothing to deﬁne, we just get the empty map. Is this 
empty map associative? The answer is yes, since there is nothing to 
check. Does there exist an identity? No, since the empty set does not 
have any elements at all. 
Thus there is no group whose underlying set is empty. 
Now suppose that we take a set with one element, call it a. The 
deﬁnition of the multiplication rule is obvious. We only need to know 
how to multiply a with a, 
m(a, a) = aa = a 2 = a ∗ a = a. 
Is this multiplication rule associative? Well suppose that g, h and k 
are three elements of G. Then g = h = k = a. We compute the LHS, 
m(m(a, a), a) = m(a, a) = a. 
Similarly the RHS is 
m(a, m(a, a)) = m(a, a) = a. 
These two are equal and so this multiplication rule is associative. Is 
their an identity? Well there is only one element of the group, a. We 
have to check that if we multiply e = a by any other element g of the 
group then we get back g. The only possible choice for g is a. 
m(g, e) = m(a, a) = a = g, 
and 
m(e, g) = m(a, a) = a = g. 
So a acts as an identity. Finally does every element have an inverse? 
Pick an element g of the group G. In fact g = a. The only possiblity 
for an inverse of g is a. 
m(g, g −1) = m(a, a) = a = e. 
Similarly 
−1 
g
g = aa = a = e. 
So there is a unique rule of multiplication for a set with one element, 
and with this law of multiplication we get a group. 
Consider the set {a, b} and deﬁne a multiplication rule by 
aa = a ab = b 
ba = b bb = a 
4 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


Here a plays the role of the identity. a and b are their own inverses. 
It is not hard to check that associativity holds and that we therefore 
get a group. 
To see some more examples of groups, it is ﬁrst useful to prove a 
general result about associativity. 
Lemma 1.2. Let f : A −→ B, g : B −→ C, h: C −→ D be three 
functions. 
Then 
h ◦ (g ◦ f) = (h ◦ g) ◦ f. 
Proof. Both the LHS and RHS are functions from A −→ D. To prove 
that two such functions are equal, it suﬃces to prove that they give 
the same value, when applied to any element a ∈ A. 
(h ◦ (g ◦ f))(a) = h((g ◦ f)(a)) 
= h(g(f(a))) 
Similarly 
((h ◦ g) ◦ f))(a) = (h ◦ g)(f(a)) 
= h(g(f(a))). 
D 
The set {I, R, R2, F1, F2, F3} is a group, where the multiplication rule 
is composition of symmetries. Any symmetry, can be interpreted as a 
function R2 −→ R2, and composition of symmetries is just composition 
of functions. Thus this rule of multiplication is associative by (1.2). 
I plays the role an identity. Since we can undo any symmetry, every 
element of the group has an inverse. 
Deﬁnition 1.3. The dihedral group Dn of order n is the group of 
symmetries of a regular n-gon. 
With this notation, D3 is the group above, the set of symmetries of 
an equilateral triangle. The same proof as above shows that Dn is a 
group. 
Deﬁnition 1.4. We say that a group G is abelian, if for every g and 
h in G, 
gh = hg. 
The groups with one or two elements above are abelian. However 
D3 as we have already seen is not abelian. Thus not every group is 
abelian. 
Consider the set of whole numbers W = {1, 2, . . . } under addition. 
Is this a group? 
5 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


Lemma 1.5. Addition and multiplication of complex number is asso­
ciative. 
Proof. Well-known. 
D 
So addition of whole numbers is certainly associative. Is there an 
identity? No. So W is not a group under addition, since there is no 
identity. 
How about if we enlarge this set by adding 0, to get the of natural 
numbers N? In this case there is an identity, but there are no inverses. 
For example 1 has no inverse, since if you add a non-negative number 
to 1 you get something at least one. 
On the other hand (Z, +) is a group under addition, where Z is the 
set of integers. Similiarly Q, R, C are all groups under addition. 
How about under multiplication? First how about Z. Multiplication 
is associative, and there is an identity, one. However not every element 
has an inverse. For example, 2 does not have an inverse. 
What about Q under multiplication? Associativity is okay. Again 
one plays the role of the identity and it looks like every element has an 
inverse. Well not quite, since 0 has no inverse. 
Once one removes zero to get Q∗ , then we do get a group under 
multiplication. Similarly R∗ and C∗ are groups under multiplication. 
All of these groups are abelian. 
We can create some more interesting groups using these examples. 
Let Mm,n(C) denote m × n matrices, with entries in C. The multipli­
cation rule is addition of matrices (that is add corresponding entries). 
This operation is certainly associative, as this can be checked entry by 
entry. The zero matrix (that is the matrix with zeroes everywhere) 
plays the role of the identity. 
Given a matric A, the inverse matrix is −A, that is the matrix ob­
tained by changing the sign of every entry. Thus Mm,n(C) is a group 
under addition, which is easily seen to be abelian. We can the replace 
complex numbers by the reals, rationals or integers. 
GLn(C) denotes the set of n × n matrices, with non-zero determi­
nant. Multiplication is simply matrix multiplication. We check that 
this is a group. First note that a matrix corresponds to a (linear) func­
tion Rn −→ Rn, and under this identiﬁcation, matrix multiplication 
corresponds to composition of functions. 
Thus matrix multiplication is associative. The matrix with one’s on 
the main diagonal and zeroes everywhere else is the identity matrix. 
6 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


For example, if n = 2, we get  
 
1
0 .
0
1
The inverse of a matrix is constructed using Gaussian elimination. 
For a 2 × 2 matrix
 
 
a
b , 
c
d
it is easy to check that the inverse is given as 
 
 
1 
d 
−b . 
ad − bc
−c
a
Note that we can replace the complex numbers by the reals or ratio­
nals. Note that D3 the group of symmetries, can be thought of as set 
of six matrices. In particular matrix multiplication is not abelian. 
7 
MIT OCW: 18.703 Modern Algebra 
Prof. James McKernan


MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
18.703 Modern Algebra
Spring 2013 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
