18.335 Midterm
You have two hours. All problems have equal weight, but some problems may be harder than others, so try
not to spend too much time on one problem.


Problem 1: Schur, backsubstitution, complexity (20 points)
You are given matrices A (m × m), B (n × n), and C (m × n), and want to solve for an unknown matrix X
(m × n) solving:
                                             AX − XB = C.
We will do this using the Schur decompositions of A and B. (Recall that any square matrix S can be factorized
in the Schur form S = QUQ∗ for some unitary matrix Q and some upper-triangular matrix U.)

  (a) Given the Schur decompositions A = QAUA Q∗A and B = QBUB Q∗B , show how to transform AX −XB = C
      into new equations A0 X 0 − X 0 B0 = C0 , where A0 and B0 are upper triangular and X 0 is the new m × n
      matrix of unknowns. That is, express, A0 , B0 , and C0 in terms of A, B, and C (or their Schur factors),
      and show how to get X back from X 0 .

  (b) Given the upper-triangular system A0 X 0 − X 0 B0 = C0 from (a), give an algorithm to ﬁnd the last row of
      X 0 . (Hint: look at the last row of the equation.)

  (c) Suppose you have computed all rows > j of X 0 , give an algorithm to compute the j-th row.

  (d) The combination of the previous three parts yields a backsubstitution-like algorithm to solve for X.
      What is the complexity of this algorithm (not including the cost of computing the Schur factors)?
      That is, give the leading terms in m, n for the operation count; don’t worry about constant factors [ for
      example, O(m7 ) would be ﬁne; you don’t need to specify that it is ∼ 15     7
                                                                              9 m ].


Problem 2: Stability (20 points)
If a method for solving Ax = b is backwards stable, what does that imply about the size of the computed
                               − Ax̃ from the computed x̃? i.e. relate kr̃k to O(εmachine ) and any norms or
(ﬂoating-point) residual r̃ = b^
condition numbers of A and/or b that you might need.


Problem 3: Conjugate gradient (20 points)
The conjugate-gradient (CG) algorithm to solve a positive-deﬁnite Hermitian system of equations Ax = b is
given below.

                                           x0 = 0, r0 = b, d0 = r0

                                               for n = 1, 2, . . .

                                                       r∗    r
                                               αn = d ∗n−1Adn−1
                                                             n−1
                                                       n−1


                                             xn = xn−1 + αn dn−1

                                            rn = rn−1 − αn Adn−1
                                                                   ∗
                                           dn = rn + dn−1 r∗ rn rrn−1
                                                                  n
                                                                 n−1



                                                       1
    Now, suppose instead of A being positive-deﬁnite, it is only positive-semideﬁnite—the eigenvalues λ are
nonnegative, but some are zero. A (non-unique) solution to Ax = b still exists if b is in the column space of
A, that is if b is in the span of the positive-λ eigenvectors. The following questions concern the application
CG to this situation.

  (a) Let the eigenvalues and (orthonormal) eigenvectors of A be denoted by Aq j = λ j q j ( j = 1, . . . , m), and
      suppose that only the ﬁrst k eigenvalues λ1,...,k are zero. If we expand xn in the basis of these eigen-
      vectors q j at each step, what does each step of CG do to the coefﬁcients of these ﬁrst k eigenvectors?
      i.e. do these zero-λ eigenvector components, grow, shrink, or stay the same in magnitude when we go
      from xn−1 to xn ?

  (b) From the previous part, conclude whether the CG algorithm above will converge. If not, explain what
      the residual krn k does (how fast it grows, if it grows). If it converges, explain what it converges to and
      what determines the rate of convergence (it can’t be κ(A) since that is inﬁnite!). (Hint: relate CG to
      CG on the linear operator A restricted to the subspace of nonzero-λ eigenvectors).

  (c) Does it matter if we choose the initial guess x0 = 0? i.e. what happens if we choose some random
      initial guess x0 (and correspondingly set r0 = b − Ax0 )?
  (d) Suggest an iterative algorithm to ﬁnd a vector in the null space of A. (Hint: think about b = 0.)

Problem 4: Rayleigh quotients (20 points)
Recall that, for a Hermitian matrix A, the Rayleigh quotient is the function r(x) = x∗ Ax/x∗ x. Furthermore,
we showed that,
              for anyx, r(x) is between the minimum and maximum eigenvalues of A.
                 B b
   Let A =                be a Hermitian matrix (for some Hermitian matrix B, some vector b, and some real
                b∗ γ
number γ). Show that the smallest eigenvalue of B is ≥ smallest eigenvalue of A.

Problem 5: Norms and SVDs (20 points)
                  
             I B
Let A =               with kBk2 < 1. Show that κ(A) = kAk2 kA−1 k2 = 1+kBk   2
                                                                        1−kBk2 .
            B∗ I
    Hint: Given the SVD B = UΣV ∗ of B, construct the SVD of A. Recall that the induced norm k · k2
of a matrix is simply the largest singular value, and hence the condition number is the ratio of the largest
to smallest singular values. (It might help you to think about the case where B is just a number, to get
you started—what are the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of A in that case? Then for the general case, make
eigenvectors of A out of U and V .)

Problem 6: Least-squares problems (20 points)
                                                                √
If W is positive-deﬁnite n × n, and we deﬁne the norm kxkW = x∗W x for x ∈ Cn , propose an accurate (no
stability proof required), reasonably efﬁcient algorithm to solve the weighted-least-squares problem: ﬁnd
x ∈ Cn to minimize kAx − bkW for any m × n matrix A with full column rank.




                                                        2
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu



18.335J Introduction to Numerical Methods
Spring 2019



For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
