             MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
 15.053– Optimization Methods in Management Science (SPRING 2013)
                             Information about Quiz 2.

The problems for Quiz 2 will drawn from the problem types described below. We
will assume that all linear programs are maximization problems.

The italicized words are vocabulary that may be used in the questions on the quiz.



Material from lectures 3 and 4.

   1. Given an LP with two variables, graph the feasible region, and indicate
      whether there is a redundant constraint, and determine the optimumfsolution
      and optimumfsolutionfvalue using the geometricfmethod.
   2. Given a shape in two dimensions, determine whether it is convex.          If it is
      convex, know how to identify the corner (extreme) points.
   3. Given three labeled points in a feasible region of two dimensions, identify
      whether there is some objective function for which the first two points are
      optimal, but the third point is not optimal.
   4. Know how to convert inequality constraints into equality constraints using
      slack or surplus variables.
   5. Know how to recognize whether a tableau is in canonicalfform.
   6. Given a tableauf inf canonicalf form, identify the basicf variables, the nonbasicf
      variables, and the basicffeasiblefsolution.
   7. Given a tableau that is in canonicalfform, determine the enteringfvariable or
      determine that the current solution is optimal.
   8. Given a tableau in canonical form and the entering variable, know how to use
      the Lfmethod for finding improved solutions (corresponding to an edge of the
      feasible region). Know how to identify the next basic feasible solution and
      the leavingfvariablefor determine that the objective value is unboundedffromf
      above.
   9. If the bfs for a tableau is not optimal, be able to identify the element of the
      tableau on which to pivot. Given an element of the tableau, know how to
      pivot on that element in order to create a new tableau. This includes being
      able to compute all coefficients of the new tableau.
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu




15.053 Optimization Methods in Management Science
Spring 2013




For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
